---
layout: article
title: AE 236 - Compressible Fluid Mechanics
aside:
  toc: true
sidebar:
  nav: docs-en
categories: second_year ae-236
permalink: /course_reviews/:categories
tags: aerodynamics theory
---

# Spring 2020
### Prof. Viren Menezes
**Author**: Milind Kharwade

**Pre-requisite courses**: [AE 225](/course_reviews/second_year/ae-225.html) : Incompressible Fluid Mechanics


**Pre-requisite skills**: None

**Course Content**:
* Review of Fundamentals.
* Concept of Waves in fluid, Mach waves, Compression waves, Expansion waves.
Isentropic flow, Adiabatic flow, Shock waves. Stationary and Moving Normal Shocks. Oblique Shocks, Bow Shocks in 2D. Conical Shocks, Bow Shocks in 3D.
* Shock interactions, Shock reflection from boundaries, Shockwave Boundary Layer interaction.
* Prandtl-Meyer expansion fans. Shock Expansion Methods. Mach Number and Area rule, Flow through a Nozzle: Convergent Nozzle, Convergent Divergent Nozzle, Under-expanded and Over-expanded Nozzle flows.
* Duct flow with friction and heat addition. Shock Tubes. Supersonic and Transonic Wind tunnels. Potential flow equations. High temperature aspects of gas dynamics.
* Introduction to hypersonic flows.


---

**Information about Projects/Assignments**: There were no assignments/projects at least till the midsems. Evaluation was based only on quizzes, midsems and endsems.


**Quizzes/Midsem/Endsem papers Difficulty**: 3/5

**Overall Course Difficulty**: Moderate

**Average Time Commitment**:
(Apart from lectures and tutorials)
Between 3-6 hrs


**Attendance Policy**:

---

**General funda**: Practice problems and derivations with steps. Cheat sheets are allowed but subtle assumptions told during class are important for problem solving.


**Grading stats**: S grade was given.

**Professor's Teaching Style**: The professor gives very systematic and easy to understand notes. There are no slides, except for figures. It is almost complete in itself. Generally, cheat sheets are allowed by him so that we don't have to remember all the formulae. He is also very student-friendly.

**Should you do this course?**: Sophomores with a basic idea of the governing equations in fluid mechanics can take this course. Strongly recommended for those interested in Aerodynamics and even high-speed propulsion as the course forms the basis of it.

---

# Autumn 2021
### Prof. Vineeth Nair
**Author**: Hrushikesh Deshpande

**Pre-requisite courses**: [AE 225](/course_reviews/second_year/ae-225.html) : Incompressible Fluid Mechanics


**Pre-requisite skills**: None

**Course Content**:
- Isentropic Flow
- Normal Shock Waves: Stationary and Moving Normal Shocks
- Supersonic Flow Turning: Oblique Shock Waves, Expansion Waves
- Variable Area Flow: Convergent Nozzle, Convergent Divergent Nozzle, Under-expanded and Over-expanded Nozzle flows
- Adiabatic Flow with Friction
- Flow with heat transfer

---

**Information about Projects/Assignments**: There were no assignments/projects at least till the midsems. Evaluation was based only on quizzes, midsems and endsems.

**Evaluation Structure**:
- 5 Quizzes - 65%
- Endsem - 30%
- Attendance - 5%

**Quizzes/Midsem/Endsem papers Difficulty**: 3/5

**Average Time Commitment**:
2-3 hours per week


**Attendance Policy**: DX grade was not awarded. However, 5% weightage was given for attendance.

---

**General funda**:
The instructor closely followed the book by Oosthuizen, and hence it is quite handy if you want to dive deeper. The problems given in the book serve as good practice for the quizzes. The course involves intensive use of gas tables, and thus having them close at hand is necessary. The quizzes may seem a touch lengthy at times, and hence time management is key.


**Professor's Teaching Style**:
The professor covered all the material in a well organised manner by dividing it into 5 modules, each followed by a quiz. The notes provided are neat and systematic, and usually sufficient for the exams. The lectures are decently paced and easy to follow.

**References**:
- Introduction to Compressible flow (Oosthuizen & Carscallen, CRC Press)
- Modern compressible flow with historical perspective (Anderson, McGraw Hill)

---
